feat: blog post on SIO-AsyncAPI (#1196)
asyncapi/website: pages/blog/socketio-automatic-docs.md

> ---

Reviewer: please add 2 missing props:
- `featured: true`
- `date` as we need to specify when it is published. Please set next Thursday

> title: Flask-SocketIO Automatic Documentation and Validation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Flask-SocketIO Automated Documentation and Validation
```

type: Engineering
tags: ['Python','SocketIO','Flask-SocketIO']
cover: /img/posts/socketio-automatic-docs/cover.webp
authors:
  - name: Daler Rahimov
    photo: /img/avatars/dalerrahimov.webp
    link: https://github.com/daler-rahimov/
    byline: Python Engineer at Keyme LLC
---

## What is Flask-SocketIO, SocketIO?

> If you are reading this blog you probably already familiar with SocketIO, [python-socketio](https://github.com/miguelgrinberg/python-socketio) and [Flask-SocketIO](https://flask-socketio.readthedocs.io/en/latest/). If you want to learn more about them, please check the following resources:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are reading this blog, you are probably already familiar with SocketIO [python-socketio](https://github.com/miguelgrinberg/python-socketio) and [Flask-SocketIO](https://flask-socketio.readthedocs.io/en/latest/). If you want to learn more about them, please check the following resources:
```

 - https://socket.io/docs/v4/
 - https://www.asyncapi.com/blog/socketio-part1
 - https://www.asyncapi.com/blog/socketio-part2

## The problem

> Imagine that you are working on a large project that uses a Flask-SocketIO server to handle real-time communication between the client and server. The server was originally well-documented, but over time the documentation has become out of date as the server has evolved and new features have been added.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Imagine that you are working on a large project that uses a Flask-SocketIO server to handle real-time communication between the client and the server. The server was originally well-documented, but over time the documentation has become out of date as the server has evolved and new features have been added.
```

> I found myself in the same situation. I needed to maintain and constantly add more documentation to a Flask-SocketIO server. To make this process more efficient, I sought a solution to automate the generation of documentation from the existing codebase. This would eliminate the need for team members to manually edit the AsyncAPI specification file every time there was a change, a challenging task for those unfamiliar with AsyncAPI. By automating this process, we hoped to save time and reduce the workload for the team.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I found myself in the same situation. I needed to maintain and constantly add more documentation to a Flask-SocketIO server. To make this process more efficient, I sought a solution to automate documentation generation from the existing codebase. This would eliminate the need for team members to manually edit the AsyncAPI specification file every time there was a change, a challenging task for those unfamiliar with AsyncAPI. By automating this process, we could save time and reduce the workload for the team.
```

To address this issue, I decided to implement SIO-AsyncAPI. This tool allows you to generate an AsyncAPI specification from your SocketIO server and validate incoming and outgoing messages against it. This functionality is similar to how FastAPI, Flask-RESTful, and other frameworks have long provided it for RESTful servers. Now, with [SIO-AsyncAPI](https://github.com/daler-rahimov/sio-asyncapi), it is possible to apply this approach to SocketIO servers as well.

## How to use SIO-AsyncAPI
Instead of giving you a detailed, step-by-step guide, we'll use a more exciting approach. We'll take the existing Flask-SocketIO server and add SIO-AsyncAPI. To make things even more interesting, we'll ask [ChatGPT](https://chat.openai.com/chat) to generate a server for us and use it as a real-world Flask-SocketIO server.

### Generate a Flask-SocketIO server

> I had to ask ChatGPT for multiple alterations in order to get the desired result. Here are my quires to ChatGPT:

Reviewer 2: ChatGPT 🤖 strikes again!

Author: Yep, I was surprised how good of a code it generated for Flask-SocketIO

> I had to ask ChatGPT for multiple alterations in order to get the desired result. Here are my quires to ChatGPT:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I had to ask ChatGPT for multiple alterations to get the desired result. Here are my queries to ChatGPT:
```

A `quire` is four sheets of paper or parchment folded to form eight leaves, as in **medieval manuscripts**. 📜

Guessing not the word you wanted here 😄

Author: > A `quire` is four sheets of paper or parchment folded to form eight leaves, as in **medieval manuscripts**. scroll
> 
> Guessing not the word you wanted here smile

Definitely not :)

> >- create python flask-socket server that provides tick tac toe game api

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>- create python flask-socket server that provides tic tac toe game api
```

>- change previous code and add type hints
>- for previous example use pydantic models instead of dictionaries

> And here is final code that ChatGPT generated for us:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And here is the final code that ChatGPT generated for us:
```

    # Get the game and make the move
    game = games[data.game_id]
    board = game.board
    turn = game.turn
    board[data.x][data.y] = turn

    # Check for a win or draw
    result = check_game_status(board)

    # Update the game state and send it to the client
    if result == 'X':
        emit('game_won', {'winner': 'X'})
    elif result == 'O':
        emit('game_won', {'winner': 'O'})
    elif result == 'draw':
        emit('game_drawn', {})
    else:
        games[data.game_id] = Game(board=board, turn='O' if turn == 'X' else 'X')
        emit('move_made', {'board': board, 'turn': game.turn})

def check_game_status(board: List[List[str]]) -> Union[str, None]:
    # Check for a win or draw
    for i in range(3):
        if board[i] == ['X', 'X', 'X']:
            return 'X'
        if board[i] == ['O', 'O', 'O']:
            return 'O'
    if all(board[i][i] == 'X' for i in range(3)):
        return 'X'
    if all(board[i][i] == 'O' for i in range(3)):
        return 'O'
    if all(board[i][j] != '' for i in range(3) for j in range(3)):
        return 'draw'
    return None

if __name__ == '__main__':
    socketio.run(app, debug=True)

```

> It's not quite correct (e.g. data in make_move will be passed as a dictionary not a Pydantic model), but it's good enough for our purposes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's not quite correct (e.g. data in `make_move` will be passed as a dictionary, not a Pydantic model), but it's good enough for our purposes.
```

### Generate Mermaid diagram
Now let's ask ChatGPT to generate a Mermaid diagram for us as well, so we can get a better illustration of our server:

>- create mermaid diagram for previous example

I had to alter the given diagram a bit, but here is the final result:

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Client
    participant SocketIOServer

    Client ->> SocketIOServer: create_game
    SocketIOServer -->> Client: game_created(game_id)

    Client ->> SocketIOServer: make_move(game_id, x, y)
    alt if_not_won_or_drawn
    SocketIOServer -->> Client: move_made(board, turn)
    end

    alt if_won
    SocketIOServer -->> Client: game_won(winner)
    end

    alt if_drawn
    SocketIOServer -->> Client: game_drawn
    end
```

### Add SIO-AsyncAPI to the server

> Now let's imagine that this is our old server written in Flask-SocketIO and we want to add SIO-AsyncAPI to it. Here is how we would do it:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now let's imagine that this is our old server written in Flask-SocketIO and we want to add SIO-AsyncAPI. Here is how we would do it:
```

> 1. Install SIO-AsyncAPI `pip install sio-asyncapi`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Install SIO-AsyncAPI via `pip install sio-asyncapi`
```

2. Change import statements
```python
# instead of `from flask_socketio import SocketIO`
from sio_asyncapi import AsyncAPISocketIO as SocketIO
```

> 3. Add additional argument to `AsyncAPISocketIO` constructor

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Add an additional argument to the `AsyncAPISocketIO` constructor
```

```python
socketio = SocketIO(
    app,
    validate=True,
    generate_docs=True,
    version="1.0.0",

>     title="Tick-Tack-Toe API",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    title="Tic-Tac-Toe API",
```

>     description="Tick-Tack-Toe Game API",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    description="Tic-Tac-Toe Game API",
```

    server_url="http://localhost:5000",

>     server_name="TICK_TACK_TOE_BACKEND",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    server_name="TIC_TAC_TOE_BACKEND",
```

)
```

> 5. Tell `@socketio.on` decorator to get models from typehint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Tell the `@socketio.on` decorator to get models from the type hint.
```

> > Note: you can also pass `request_model` and `response_model` arguments to `@socketio.on` decorator instead of using typehints.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Note: you can also pass `request_model` and `response_model` arguments to the `@socketio.on` decorator instead of using type hints.
```

```python
@socketio.on('make_move', get_from_typehint=True)
```

> Now type annotations will be used to generate AsyncAPI specification and validate incoming and outgoing messages. Note that the return value from a function is not data sent by `emit` function but rather `acknowledge` value that is received by the client.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now type annotations will be used to generate the AsyncAPI specification and validate incoming/outgoing messages. Note that the return value from a function is not data sent by the `emit` function but rather the `acknowledge` value that the client receives.
```

> 6. Add `on_emit` decorator to register/document a SocketIO emit event. Since we are not defining `emit` and only calling it as a function, we need to tell SIO-AsyncAPI what to expect when `emit` is called. E.g

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. Add an `on_emit` decorator to register/document a SocketIO emit event. Since we are not defining `emit` and only calling it a function, we need to tell SIO-AsyncAPI what to expect when `emit` is called. E.g.
```

Author: I rephrased it a bit here. I think it was not clear when I said "as a function"

```python
class GameCreatedData(BaseModel):
    game_id: int

@socketio.doc_emit('game_created', GameCreatedData)
@socketio.on('create_game')
def create_game():
  ...
    emit('game_created', {'game_id': game_id})
```

### Get AsyncAPI specification

> Now we can get AsyncAPI specification by calling `socketio.asyncapi_doc.get_yaml()` function. Here is how rendered specification looks like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we can get the AsyncAPI specification by calling the `socketio.asyncapi_doc.get_yaml()` function. Here is what the rendered specification looks like:
```

![Figure 1:](/img/posts/socketio-automatic-docs/sio-asycnapi-pic1.webp)

### Validation and Error handling

> SIO-AsyncAPI will automatically validate incoming and outgoing messages. If a message is not valid, it will raise one of these 3 exceptions: `EmitValidationError`, `RequestValidationError` or `ResponseValidationError`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SIO-AsyncAPI will automatically validate incoming and outgoing messages. If a message is invalid, it will raise one of these 3 exceptions: `EmitValidationError`, `RequestValidationError`, or `ResponseValidationError`.
```

> Flask-SocketIO has a decorator for default error handling `@socketio.on_error_default` that we can use. E.g.:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Flask-SocketIO has the `@socketio.on_error_default` decorator for default error handling that we can use. E.g.:
```

```python
@socketio.on_error_default
def default_error_handler(e: Exception):
    """

>     Default error handler. It called if no other error handler defined.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Default error handler. It is called if no other error handler is defined.
```

>     Handles RequestValidationError, EmitValidationError and ResponseValidationError errors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Handles RequestValidationError, EmitValidationError, and ResponseValidationError errors.
```

    """
    if isinstance(e, RequestValidationError):
        logger.error(f"Request validation error: {e}")
        return {'error': str(e)}
    elif isinstance(e, ResponseValidationError):
        logger.critical(f"Response validation error: {e}")
        raise e
    if isinstance(e, EmitValidationError):
        logger.critical(f"Emit validation error: {e}")
        raise e
    else:
        logger.critical(f"Unknown error: {e}")
        raise e
```

> Instead of re-raising exceptions, we can return some error which is interpreted as `acknowledge` value sent to the client. That's what we are doing in the example above when there is a RequestValidationError.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instead of re-raising exceptions, we can return some error interpreted as an `acknowledge` value sent to the client. That's what we do in the example above when there is a `RequestValidationError`.
```

> This is how it looks like in FireCamp if we do not provide "game_id" in "make_move" request:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is how it looks like in FireCamp if we do not provide `game_id` in the `make_move` request:
```

![Figure 2:](/img/posts/socketio-automatic-docs/sio-asycnapi-pic2.webp)

> Because the make_move request may return an error in the acknowledge value now, we should add a new MakeMoveAckData model and annotate the make_move function accordingly. This will automatically update the documentation in our AsyncAPI specification.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because the `make_move` request may return an error in the acknowledged value now, we should add a new `MakeMoveAckData` model and annotate the `make_move` function accordingly. This will automatically update the documentation in our AsyncAPI specification.
```

```python
class MakeMoveAckData(BaseModel):
    error: Optional[str] = Field(None, description='The error message', example='Invalid move')

...
@socketio.on('make_move', get_from_typehint=True)
def make_move(data: MakeMoveData) -> MakeMoveAckData:
  ...
```

### Final Code and Specification
Here is the final code of the server. I also added examples to Pydantic models to make the specification more readable.
```python
import pathlib
from typing import List, Union, Optional

from flask import Flask
from flask_socketio import emit
from pydantic import BaseModel, Field
from loguru import logger

from sio_asyncapi import AsyncAPISocketIO as SocketIO
from sio_asyncapi import (EmitValidationError, RequestValidationError,
                          ResponseValidationError)

app = Flask(__name__)

socketio = SocketIO(
    app,
    validate=True,
    generate_docs=True,
    version="1.0.0",

>     title="Tick-Tack-Toe API",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    title="Tic-Tac-Toe API",
```

>     description="Tick-Tack-Toe Game API",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    description="Tic-Tac-Toe Game API",
```

    server_url="http://localhost:5000",

>     server_name="TICK_TACK_TOE_BACKEND",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    server_name="TIC_TAC_TOE_BACKEND",
```

      type: object
    MakeMoveData:
      properties:
        game_id:
          description: The game id
          example: 1
          title: Game Id
          type: integer
        x:
          description: The x coordinate
          example: 0
          title: X
          type: integer
        y:
          description: The y coordinate
          example: 0
          title: Y
          type: integer
      required:
      - game_id
      - x
      - y
      title: MakeMoveData
      type: object
    MoveMadeData:
      properties:
        board:
          description: The game board
          example:
          - - X
            - O
            - ''
          - - ''
            - X
            - ''
          - - ''
            - ''
            - O
          items:
            items:
              type: string
            type: array
          title: Board
          type: array
        turn:
          description: The current turn
          example: X
          title: Turn
          type: string
      required:
      - board
      - turn
      title: MoveMadeData
      type: object
    NoSpec:
      deprecated: false
      description: Specification is not provided
info:

>   description: 'Tick-Tack-Toe Game API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  description: 'Tic-Tac-Toe Game API
```

    <br/> AsyncAPI currently does not support Socket.IO binding and Web Socket like
    syntax used for now.

    In order to add support for Socket.IO ACK value, AsyncAPI is extended with with
    x-ack keyword.

    This documentation should **NOT** be used for generating code due to these limitations.

    '

>   title: Tick-Tack-Toe API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  title: Tic-Tac-Toe API
```

  version: 1.0.0
servers:

>   TICK_TACK_TOE_BACKEND:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  TIC_TAC_TOE_BACKEND:
```

---
title: Flask-SocketIO Automated Documentation and Validation

> date: 2023-01-26T06:00:00+01:00

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2023-03-02T06:00:00+01:00
```

@daler-rahimov sorry for delay with releasing the article, please update the date and we will release and promote it this week
